GATES: I'm Henry
Louis Gates, Jr.,
welcome to "Finding Your Roots".
In this episode, we'll meet
activist Brittany
Packnett Cunningham,
and law professor Anita Hill.
Two women who have made profound
sacrifices for social justice,
are about to discover
the ancestors who made
sacrifices for them.
PACKNETT: I didn't even
know that anything was missing
until I realized
what wasn't there.
HILL: It goes to something
deep inside me that feels
like I'm connected.
GATES: To uncover their roots,
we've used every tool available.
Genealogists helped
stitch together the past
from the paper trail their
ancestors left behind.
PACKNETT: Wow!
That is stunning!
GATES: While DNA experts
utilized the latest advances
in genetic analysis to reveal
secrets hundreds of years old.
HILL: Are you kidding?
GATES: And we've compiled
it all into a book of life,
a record of all of
our discoveries.
PACKNETT: Oh my gosh!
So you found my grandfather!
GATES: And a window
into the hidden past.
HILL: It just feels so
good and so important,
it just feels like a
hole has been filled.
PACKNETT: It's like
finding yourself.
GATES: My two guests came to
me with fundamental questions
about their family trees.
In this episode, we're
going to give them the answers
they've been searching for,
using a pioneering combination
of genetics and genealogy.
Along the way, each will meet
ancestors whose identities
they never even imagined,
and each will see themselves,
and our nation's history
in an entirely new light.
(theme music plays).
♪ ♪
GATES: Anita Hill
needs no introduction.
She's a vital part of
our nation's history.
In 1991, when she
testified, reluctantly,
about the sexual harassment
she'd allegedly endured while
working for Supreme Court
nominee Clarence Thomas,
her's was a lone voice,
seemingly calling out
from the wilderness.
HILL: Telling the world
is the most difficult
experience of my life
GATES: Today, she's a feminist
icon, and a hero to generations.
But her story begins
in an unlikely place,
far from the spotlight.
Anita was born in the tiny
town of Okmulgee, Oklahoma,
the youngest of 13 siblings.
Her parents were farmers,
and she was raised without
running water or indoor plumbing
until she was 12 years old.
Even so, she wasn't limited
by her circumstances.
Quite the opposite.
HILL: It was isolated.
But it didn't feel
isolated. Uh...
GATES: Well, you had siblings.
HILL: I had my siblings,
and my family believed in the
future, and my
mother in particular.
My mother was, you know,
this person who said,
I want to make sure every one
of my children has a chance to
go to college and later in life,
when I was talking
with her about it,
she said, um, it was
because she didn't.
And she really did believe
that in order to prepare for
the future, in a, in a way,
the future that didn't really
exist, it was, you know, just
an imagination of what the
future would be like, she
wanted us to be ready for it
if it happened.
GATES: It's hard to believe
that even Anita's mother could
have imagined the future
that lay in front of her.
In a matter of years,
Anita went from being the
valedictorian of her
local high school,
to a graduate of the
Yale School of Law,
to working at the United States'
Department of Education's
Office for Civil Rights
to sitting down for a grilling
by an all-white, all-male
senate judiciary committee.
At each step, she faced,
and overcame,
seemingly
insurmountable challenges.
But the greatest challenge
of all was yet to come.
Most of the people polled,
regardless of race and gender,
believed that Clarence Thomas
should still be confirmed to
the Supreme Court
after your testimony.
And even Black people,
uh, in the Black community,
like, well, it's a
brother, you know,
we have to defend the brother.
How did that make you feel?
HILL: It hurt to know that
people didn't believe me,
uh, but maybe
it's because I'm a,
somewhat of an
optimist, I was happy that,
um, you know, a
third of the people did.
GATES: Right.
HILL: And, and, I was naïve
about the resistance to this
idea of women, uh, uh,
having these experiences,
and even, even if
they had the experiences,
telling about it.
GATES: Right.
HILL: So, I was
coming up against two,
uh, social pressures,
one to, first of all,
just deny that I had it,
and, and even if I
acknowledged that I had it,
uh, I was supposed to
never tell about it.
And so, even, so,
that, as I said,
well, if a third of
people do believe it,
then that's progress.
GATES: Anita's optimism
would prove prescient.
In the decades since she risked
so much to give her testimony,
the world and the workplace
have changed dramatically.
And Anita is now seen as a
harbinger of these changes.
Today she's a
distinguished law professor,
and an outspoken advocate
for a wide range of issues
surrounding racial
and gender equality.
Fittingly, in 2020,
Time
magazine named her one of
the most influential women
of the past century.
Looking back at everything
you've accomplished,
what are you proudest of?
HILL: I, I'm proudest of
staying in the struggle
for 30 years.
I was 35 when I started.
I thought I would give the
issues a couple of years,
and I thought it was gonna
be about sexual harassment,
and it's grown.
I've grown, and grown
in my understanding,
and in my ability to include
more people who are suffering,
and to see beyond,
uh, my own experience,
not just sort of,
uh, to dismiss it,
but to understand how it's
connected to the experiences
that people are having today,
that they need help with.
GATES: Much like
Anita, my second guest,
Brittany Packnett Cunningham,
has devoted her life to the
struggle for equality.
But where Anita has often
worked behind the scenes,
Brittany has been
on the front lines,
as an activist and an organizer.
It's a role she
was born to play.
Growing up, Brittany's
mother was a social worker,
and her father was the pastor of
Central Baptist
Church in St. Louis,
a congregation with deep ties
to the civil rights movement.
Their influence shaped
Brittany to her core.
So you had to go to
church every Sunday?
PACKNETT: Every Sunday,
and then again on Wednesday,
and then again on Saturday,
and then sometimes Tuesdays.
Yes.
GATES: But didn't it
make you want to rebel?
I mean, be bad, like
your father was a preacher?
Like go steal some crayons or?
PACKNETT: No.
But I, I think what I remember
so much was that it made me
want to be committed.
I think even at a young age
it gave me a lot of excitement
and curiosity and
desire to just dive in.
GATES: Brittany's desire to
"commit" came to a head at
a pivotal moment in our
country's long troubled
racial history.
On August 9, 2014,
Michael Brown,
an unarmed teenager, was
killed by a police officer
in Ferguson, Missouri,
just miles from Brittany's
childhood home.
Brittany was on a trip to
Kansas City with her mother
when she heard the news that
would forever change her life.
PACKNETT: I got on Instagram
and I saw a picture of a man
holding up a cardboard
sign that said
Ferguson Police Department
just killed my unarmed son.
GATES: Mm.
PACKNETT: It turned out it
was Michael Brown's stepdad,
and I was like,
Ferguson, Missouri?
Like, from the crib?
Down the street?
Ferguson, Ferguson?
Like, where Miss Patrice
used to braid my hair?
That Ferguson?
Wait a minute.
So then I got on Twitter
because the news wasn't
saying anything about it.
I got on Twitter and
started to see more.
And I said to my mom, I said,
I said, "we have to go."
GATES: Mm.
PACKNETT: I said, "I don't
exactly know where we're
walking back home to."
She said, "well, is there
a meeting you're being
asked to come to?"
I said, "no."
I said, "I don't know,
but I just know I need,
we need to be home."
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: And I
need to be there.
GATES: In the wake
of Brown's murder,
Brittany became heavily
involved in the demonstrations
of the burgeoning
Black Lives Matter movement.
Shortly thereafter, she was
named to President Obama's
task force for 21st
century policing.
And in 2015, she
co-founded Campaign Zero,
with the goal of
eliminating police violence
in the United States.
It's a goal that we have not
yet come close to meeting,
but Brittany remains undeterred.
PACKNETT: We know from data
that other nations similar to
ours in size and scope
and history and wealth,
um, are able to not
kill anybody by police.
GATES: It doesn't
have to be this way.
PACKNETT: It actually does
not have to be this way.
GATES: No.
PACKNETT: Um, the good news
is there are people throughout
history who have seen things
as they can be and not as they
are, and then went
and created them.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: And that's exactly
what we're trying to do.
GATES: You have to
believe that over time...
PACKNETT: That's right.
GATES: At the arc of
the moral universe...
PACKNETT: It's long, but
it bends toward justice.
GATES: You have
to believe that.
PACKNETT: Yeah. Yeah.
GATES: After spending
time with my guests,
it was clear that Brittany and
Anita had both been shaped by
the values of their families.
Now, each was about to
take a journey that would
dramatically expand
their understanding of those
families, and the origins
of the values that
they had inherited.
We started with
Brittany and her father,
the reverend Ronald
Broadnox Packnett.
Tragically, Ronald passed away
when Brittany was just 12,
and she's still
grappling with his absence,
even as she follows
in his footsteps.
GATES: What do you think he
would make of your choice to
be an activist and the success
you've had as an activist?
PACKNETT: I hope
he'd be proud.
Um, I think he'd
have a lot of opinions.
I think I'd have a backseat
organizer with me at all times
if he were still here.
Um, probably not
backseat, front seat,
to be honest with you.
Um, I think he would be,
I hope that he would
see very clearly
the profound impact
that he had on raising
a free and proud Black girl.
GATES: Though Ronald's
influence on Brittany is clear,
he's also at the center
of a mystery that has
haunted her since her childhood.
Ronald grew up without a father,
and Brittany has long yearned
to learn the identity of her
grandfather, whoever he may be.
PACKNETT: I literally only
know of one story that I heard
my dad tell from the pulpit.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
Can you tell me that?
PACKNETT: He saw his
father, they were estranged,
um, he saw his father standing
on a street corner and he was
inebriated, drunk, and kind of
generally pointing in my dad's
direction and said,
"that's my son."
GATES: Mmm.
PACKNETT: And I don't know if
that's how he found out that
that was his father, but
that's all I ever knew about
my grandfather.
GATES: And what are
you hoping to find out?
PACKNETT: I just want
to know who he was.
Um, my grandmother,
uh, my dad's mom,
Mamie, was a firecracker
and incredibly strong.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: But I just, I want to
know the other half of my dad.
GATES: To answer
Brittany's questions,
we focused first on this one
story that she had heard
about her grandfather.
It stemmed from a rumor in the
Chicago neighborhood where her
father was born, it
turned out to be false.
Brittany's grandfather was
not a drunk on the street.
But to find out his true
identity would require some
intense DNA detective work.
To start our search, we had
Brittany and her mother take
DNA tests, then we compared
their results with the DNA
of people in
publicly-available databases.
We discovered that Brittany
matched someone who shares
about 7.5% of her DNA,
meaning the two have a
close common ancestor.
An ancestor whose relationship
to Brittany could not be
immediately explained.
What's more, this match did
not share any of Brittany's
mother's DNA.
So the relationship had to
be on her father's side.
PACKNETT: Wow!
GATES: We live for
a moment like this.
We live for a match like this.
PACKNETT: Wow.
GATES: This is the beginning.
That match must be related
to you through your unknown
paternal grandfather.
PACKNETT: Oh my gosh.
Oh my gosh. Okay.
GATES: Could you
please turn the page?
Now, Brittany, based on
the analysis that we did,
we determined that you and
this match are related through
the match's father, a
man named Ronald Coble.
C-o-b-l-e.
Do you see him
there on that tree?
PACKNETT: Yeah.
I've never heard the
Coble name in my life.
GATES: Ronald Coble is
your father's uncle.
PACKNETT: Wow.
GATES: His parents
are listed there,
right above him.
They are your
father's grandparents.
You have just met
your great-grandparents.
PACKNETT: Oh my gosh.
GATES: Would you please
read their names?
PACKNETT: "Adolphus, Adolf,
James Coble, Sr.
Lucille Georgia Daniels."
Wow.
GATES: What's it
like to learn this?
PACKNETT: It's like
finding yourself.
I mean, I had just never even
tried to find any of them.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: Because
I had no way to.
GATES: Mm-mm.
PACKNETT: And my dad wasn't
here to help me fill any of
the blanks in.
GATES: Right. Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: And it sounds like he
had plenty of blanks himself.
GATES: Mm-mm.
PACKNETT: Wow.
GATES: We were now very
close to solving the mystery.
Records revealed that Adolphus
and Lucille had two sons.
One of them was
named Ronald Coble,
Brittany's great uncle.
Leading us to an
inescapable conclusion.
This means that Adolphus
and Lucille's other son...
PACKNETT: Is my grandfather.
GATES: Is your father's
father, your grandfather.
Could you please turn the page?
PACKNETT: This is him?
Oh my gosh.
(cries).
What's his name?
GATES: Adolphus James Coble, Jr.
GATES: You are looking
at your grandfather.
PACKNETT: Oh goodness.
GATES: What's it like
to know his name and
to see his face finally
after all these years?
PACKNETT: It is such a gift.
My dad was such a doting father.
My mom always said he
spoiled us too much,
and the older I've gotten I
realize it's because he was
trying to do
everything his dad didn't do.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: And I wish they
would have known each other.
But I still am, like, so
grateful that he made my dad.
GATES: Brittany's grandfather,
who went by his middle name,
"James", was born
in Texas in 1925.
By 1950, he was married
and living in Los Angeles,
which raised a question:
how did he meet Brittany's
grandmother Mamie Packnett?
Try as we might, we just
couldn't connect the two.
We knew that Mamie gave
birth to Brittany's father in
Chicago in 1951.
But we could find no evidence
that James was anywhere near
Chicago nine months before that.
Then we noticed that Mamie had
at least six siblings living
in Los Angeles at the
time her son was conceived,
and all of them lived in the
same neighborhood as James!
Suggesting that Mamie may well
have met James while visiting
one of her siblings.
PACKNETT: Wow.
This wasn't even a
figment of my imagination.
It's not as though
there was a story there...
GATES: Uh-huh.
PACKNETT: And there
were holes to fill in.
There was no story.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: Because I did not know
anything about my grandfather,
and so then for the story
to be this dramatic...
GATES: Mm.
PACKNETT: I've got
so many questions.
I don't even know if my
grandmother knew that...
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: That
was my dad's dad.
GATES: Right.
PACKNETT: I don't think my dad
knew that that was his dad.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: I don't, I wonder if
James knew that my dad existed.
GATES: He might not have.
You know, you could, a party,
one night stand, you know?
You just don't know.
PACKNETT: You
really don't know.
You really don't know.
GATES: But a 70-year-old
mystery has been solved.
PACKNETT: Wow.
GATES: Brittany wanted to know
what happened to
her grandfather.
We found the answer, sadly,
on his death certificate.
PACKNETT: Place of death,
Los Angeles, California.
Informant, Claudia Wallace.
Cause of death, stab wound
of chest with hemorrhage.
Justifiable homicide.
At home during
an altercation."
GATES: Your grandfather was
murdered in his home at the
age of 32 and your father
would have been six years old
at the time, and you
see the informant's name?
PACKNETT: Yes.
GATES: Claudia Wallace?
GATES: That's James' ex-wife.
They had gotten a divorce
five years before this,
but she was clearly
still part of his life.
PACKNETT: Right. 32?
GATES: Mm-hmm. 32.
The family story is that James
allegedly was stabbed with an
ice pick by a
jealous girlfriend.
PACKNETT: Whoa.
I mean, I lost my dad
when I was 12, but
I couldn't imagine him being
taken from me in that way.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: I'm going to
be thinking about that
for a long time.
I'm going to be thinking about
all of this for a long time.
GATES: There's a
silver lining to this story.
In November of 1950, seven
months before Brittany's
father was born, James Coble
and his wife Claudia had a
daughter named Isis.
She's Brittany's aunt,
and though she
passed away in 2012,
she left behind
a daughter of her own,
Morgan Coble-Garrett,
and Morgan is very
much alive today.
She is your half first cousin.
PACKNETT: Oh my gosh.
GATES: Did it ever occur to
you that you had other family
on your father's side of...
PACKNETT: No.
GATES: But you do.
PACKNETT: Never. Oh.
I can't believe this.
GATES: According
to your cousin,
your grandfather was a very
charismatic and intelligent man.
PACKNETT: Wow.
GATES: Which is in such
contrast to this image
your father had, right?
PACKNETT: Yeah.
GATES: So, what's it like
finally to learn this after
all these years?
PACKNETT: It feels like a
picture that's finally
being colored in.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: Um, he
just went from,
like, a character in
the story to a person.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: That even through
what sounds like a lot of,
um, complicated
family history...
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: Um, that gave me one
of the most amazing people
I ever knew, and it's just
a real privilege to know,
mm, some of what he
passed on to my dad,
even with their disconnection.
Wow.
GATES: Much like Brittany,
Anita Hill came to me with
questions about an entire
branch of her family tree.
Her mother's parents,
William Elliott and Ida crooks,
died in the 1930s, almost two
decades before Anita was born.
Anita knew little about them
beyond a few anecdotes she
heard from her mother.
We picked up their story in
Little River County, Arkansas,
where, in 1895 William applied
for a homestead grant.
These grants were
not given freely,
it took hard work to get them.
But ultimately William
satisfied the many arduous
requirements that the
federal government
demanded of homesteaders,
allowing Anita's grandparents
to own their own farm.
An extraordinary feat for
African Americans at this time.
What's it like to see that?
HILL: I, I'm just, I'm
so proud that he
and my grandmother
took a chance.
And um, they went
through the process.
Not everybody did that.
GATES: Not everybody
who tried was successful.
HILL: Absolutely.
People who tried,
some people failed,
because there were requirements.
You couldn't just sit on a land.
You had to actually
improve the land.
You had to build on it,
and they did what it took,
uh, which had to be very,
very, very difficult.
Um, so, you know, this
makes me feel so
proud, and it also,
in an odd way, it makes me
just feel proud to know that
his life has been documented.
GATES: Mm-mm.
HILL: And that they have a
record that my grandfather and
grandmother existed,
even though her name's not
on here, that they...
GATES: Of course.
HILL: Existed, and, and
that they really sort of
grabbed this part
of citizenship,
as a right that they
had, and they owned it.
They took it.
GATES: Anita's grandparent's
accomplishment is all the more
impressive given
where it occurred.
Just three years before they
were awarded their homestead,
Little River County was
consumed by a campaign of
racial terror in which armed
parties of white men scoured
the countryside,
murdering African Americans,
supposedly as retribution for
the killing of a white planter.
Violence of this type
was not uncommon in
the Jim Crow south.
But, even so, the
details were shocking.
HILL: "three more dead
negroes have been found in
Red River Bottoms
between New Boston, Texas,
and Rocky Comfort, Arkansas,
two of them, having been
hanged or shot to death.
The third body was stripped
entirely nude when found.
A negro who arrived here today,
says that every negro in the
neighborhood of Rocky Comfort
and Richmond has left his
home and is afraid to return."
GATES: This article reported
on what is now known as the
Little River County race war.
Can you imagine
living through this?
HILL: Well, and New Boston is
where my grandmother was from,
uh, and she had had
a brother who died.
GATES: Danny.
HILL: Yeah,
Danny, who died, uh,
because of a land
dispute with a white person,
he was murdered.
And so, to have that
really in your backyard,
and to be so close to it
personally in your life.
GATES: Mm-mm.
HILL: I just wonder if
they ever lost that fear.
GATES: Unfortunately, Anita's
grandparents would soon be
faced with a
terrible new problem.
As they struggled
to run their farm,
they fell into debt, and
became heavily mortgaged to a
local constable, a white
man named Ernest Hale.
By 1915, the value of the
Elliott farm was well below
the cost of their debts, so
they sold their property to
Hale and moved to Oklahoma.
It was a decision that could
not have been made lightly,
but it paid off.
The family took root
in their new home.
Anita herself would be born
in Oklahoma more than
three decades later.
Leading her to reflect
on her grandparents'
immense tenacity.
HILL: I think you know,
for some people,
it could've just been,
this is so painful,
and it could have stopped
them dead in their tracks,
but they moved on.
GATES: Mmm-hmm.
HILL: It was just, they
wanted something better,
and they knew they were
never gonna get a fair shake,
um, where they were and,
you know, they picked up and
moved hundreds of miles away,
um, to start all over again.
They weren't, you
know, children,
even, at that point.
GATES: No.
HILL: You know, they were
a middle-aged couple with,
with small children,
but they moved.
GATES: Mmm-hmm.
HILL: And maybe that's the
only way that they were
able to survive.
GATES: In the end, William
and Ida secured their family's
safety and
security with this move,
but in the process, they left
their family's history behind.
Indeed, Anita knew almost
nothing about her
maternal roots beyond
her grandparents.
Happily, we were able to
reconstruct those roots,
through the use of DNA.
We noticed that Anita
shares DNA with many people in
publicly available databases,
all of whom trace back to
one couple, and we found
that couple in the 1870 census,
living in Bowie County, Texas.
Could you please
read their names?
HILL: Grandison
Lewis and Penny.
GATES: Have you ever
heard those names before?
Grandison? Penny?
Or the surname Lewis?
HILL: No.
GATES: Well, Anita, based
on the genetic evidence,
we believe that Grandison and
Penny Lewis are likely one set
of Ida's grandparents,
which makes them your
great-great-grandparents.
HILL: Oh, wow.
Oh, wow.
GATES: What's it
like to see that?
HILL: I can't
explain it, but it
it really just goes to
something deep inside me
that feels like I'm connected.
I mean, a real
feeling of connection,
and before it's
all been abstract,
and I have a name
and a location...
GATES: Yeah.
HILL: And, and
where they were.
I didn't know
where, where they were.
GATES: Right.
HILL: It's wonderful.
It, it really is wonderful.
GATES: We'd already identified
Brittany Packnett Cunningham's
grandfather, James Coble,
introducing her to an entire
branch of her family tree
that she'd never even
heard of before.
And we were just
getting started!
James's grandmother, Brittany's
great-great-grandmother,
was a woman named
Hartense Hayes.
And tracing her roots led us
to the 1870 census for
Lincoln County, Tennessee,
here we found Hartense's father,
Lafayette Hayes,
and his seven siblings,
living with their parents,
Newman and Mary.
You are back to your great-
great-great-great-grandparents
on your father's line.
PACKNETT: Goodness. Goodness.
GATES: You just met
three more generations.
PACKNETT: From a family I
didn't even know existed.
GATES: From your, no, and from
whom you have inherited DNA.
These are your, this
is your biological kin.
PACKNETT: Wow.
This is incredible.
It just means something
different to go from saying
our ancestors, my ancestors,
my elders, our elders...
GATES: Yeah.
PACKNETT: To saying Lafayette
and Hartense and James.
Wow.
GATES: And your
father descends from them.
PACKNETT: He's looking down
from heaven right now going,
oh, so that's who my people are.
Wow.
GATES: This census
indicates that Brittany's
third great-grandfather
Lafayette was born in Tennessee
in 1861,
meaning that he and his
parents and elder siblings
were almost
certainly born into slavery.
We now set out to see
how they experienced
this terrible time.
We suspect they were all forced
to work in the fields,
likely on a small farm,
but we aren't certain.
What we do know is
that in early 1864,
with the Civil War raging,
they were freed
as the Union army
occupied Tennessee.
And, at that point, two of
Brittany's relatives did
something remarkable.
Muster rolls show that
Lafayette's older brothers,
Ebenezer and James P. Hayes,
joined the Union army.
PACKNETT: I had no idea.
Whew.
GATES: Your third
great-grandfather Lafayette
was too young to serve, but
his brothers served in the
United States Colored Troops.
What's it like to see that?
PACKNETT: I mean, I'm,
I'm both proud and angry.
GATES: Mm-hmm,
why are you angry?
PACKNETT: I'm angry that they
had to step up to fight for
freedom that belongs to them.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: And I'm incredibly
proud that, to know that
I come from people
who run toward the fight.
GATES: James and Ebenezer
volunteered on
February 13th, 1864
in Pulaski, Tennessee.
Both men were assigned to
the 111th regiment of
the United States
Colored Troops,
which was almost immediately
thrown into battle,
moving south from
Tennessee into the
heart of the Confederacy.
It must have been thrilling
to bear arms against slavery,
but this story was about
to take a tragic turn.
The 111th would be
ravaged by the war.
Ebenezer died in an army
hospital just months after
enlisting, in May of 1864,
at Athens, Alabama.
PACKNETT: He signed up
for freedom he never got.
GATES: Mm.
PACKNETT: I mean, that is...
Courage that my generation has
thankfully never been asked to
display at that level because
other generations did,
and yet and still the profound
unfairness of it
all is striking.
GATES: And think about this,
remember Ebenezer and his
brother were in
the same regiment.
PACKNETT: Right. Right.
GATES: The 111th, so James
was almost certainly in Athens
when his brother died.
PACKNETT: Mm. Mm.
GATES: Can you imagine what that
must have been like for him?
PACKNETT: I can't, honestly.
I mean, it's, I don't know
how you prepare yourself
for something like that.
GATES: Mm.
PACKNETT: Or how you
make sense of it ever.
I mean, enslavement
is unnatural, right?
GATES: Totally.
PACKNETT: So then you
lose your brother
fighting alongside
him for freedom.
There's no possible way
this ever just made sense.
GATES: James had little
time to process his loss.
In September of 1864,
Athens, Alabama,
was attacked by
Confederate forces led by
Nathan Bedford Forrest,
a ruthless cavalry general,
and a notorious racist.
Just months earlier, forrest
had overseen the massacre of
Black troops following the
surrender of Union forces at
Fort Pillow, Tennessee.
After the war, he'd help
found the Ku Klux Klan.
And now, Brittany's relative
was in his crosshairs.
A newspaper from the era
tells us what happened next.
PACKNETT: "Forrest,
the hero of Fort Pillow,
arrived at Athens, Alabama
with a force estimated at
4,000 and captured the
post which was one of the
strongest in the district.
The post had portions of the
111th United States
Colored Troops.
We have no details of the
surrender and do not know
what resistance,
if any, was made."
Wow.
I just wonder, was he scared?
Was he angry?
Was he determined?
Was he fed up?
I just, I can't imagine,
I can't imagine.
GATES: Unlike at Fort Pillow,
forrest spared the
Black soldiers he
captured in Athens,
so James was sent to a
Confederate prison camp
in Meridian, Mississippi.
The end of the war was looming,
and he and his family must
have hoped he would survive to
see it, but those
hopes were dashed.
PACKNETT: "James P Hayes.
February 16, 1865.
Meridian, Mississippi.
Died while a prisoner of war.
Cause, bad
treatment of the enemy."
Wow.
He did all that just
for it to kill him.
GATES: The Confederacy treated
prisoners of war abysmally,
and particularly Black
prisoners of war.
PACKNETT: Yeah.
GATES: They endured
cramped living quarters,
rampant disease.
Some were also put to
work, re-enslavement.
And we know that prisoners
from the 111th were used for
hard labor to build railway
lines and fortifications.
PACKNETT: Hmm.
GATES: James and Ebenezer,
your blood relatives,
made the ultimate sacrifice
for your freedom and mine.
PACKNETT: A choice they
never should have had to make.
Um.
GATES: No.
PACKNETT: But um, a
brave one indeed.
GATES: What's it been
like to hear their stories?
PACKNETT: Oh, man.
I find myself...
Struck by the cruelty
of our history and
um, wondering what
could have been.
I mean, their lives were very
literally stolen and so is
every other enslaved persons'.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: And I, often ask
myself to imagine what life is
beyond oppression.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: So that we know
what we're building toward.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: And I just
wonder what the answer to that
question would have
looked like for them.
GATES: Mm.
PACKNETT: If they had
made it to the other side.
GATES: Right.
PACKNETT: What was the
kind of life they wanted?
GATES: That they dreamed of.
PACKNETT: Yeah.
GATES: James
and Ebenezer are among the
roughly 40,000 African Americans
who died serving the union.
But their loss was
not entirely in vain.
The brothers were awarded
pensions for their service,
pensions that helped support
their mother and father,
Brittany's fourth
great-grandparents,
as well as their
siblings, into the 1880s,
giving the family a measure of
financial stability that many
newly-freed African Americans
were unable to obtain.
PACKNETT: This is, wow.
GATES: What would your
dad make of all this?
PACKNETT: When he pastored
Central Baptist he used to do
children's story time.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: Um,
because, you know,
my dad was a liberation
theologian story time would be
a little Bible mixed in with
some social justice and
some Black power.
GATES: And some Black history.
PACKNETT: Yeah.
Um, I have a feeling he
would have mixed
some of these stories in.
GATES: Yeah.
PACKNETT: Yeah.
GATES: We'd already traced
Anita Hill's maternal roots
back to her
great-great-grandfather,
Grandison Lewis, who was born
into slavery and was living in
Bowie County, Texas
when the Civil War ended.
Now we wanted to see if we
could find any evidence of his
life during slavery.
This posed an extremely
difficult challenge
to our genealogists.
Enslaved people were almost
never listed by name in the
federal census because
denying them their names,
a key part of a
person's humanity,
was a way of reinforcing
the fiction that
they were property.
A fundamental part
of the slave system.
But there were a few exceptions.
In 1850, three counties in the
entire United States chose to
record the names
of enslaved people.
Utah County, Utah.
Scott County, Tennessee.
And Bowie County, Texas.
HILL: Wow.
How is that, how,
you know, how does,
I mean, this,
this is, like, the,
winning the lottery here.
GATES: You have won the
genealogical jackpot,
and it's because
some county clerk,
or census-taker decided that
it was important to write down
the names of the enslaved
people on a slave schedule,
but only in three counties
in the whole United States in
1850 did that happen,
and it happened where your
great-great-grandfather
was living,
and that's why you're
able to see his name.
HILL: Oh I love it.
I love it.
GATES: That is a miracle.
HILL: Yeah.
GATES: According
to this census, in 1850,
Grandison was one of 22 people
enslaved by Charles Lewis,
a white farmer who ran a large
plantation in Bowie County.
So Anita now knew the name
of the man who enslaved her
ancestor, prompting some
decidedly mixed emotions.
HILL: In, in some way,
it humanizes him,
but in some ways,
it dehumanizes him to me,
because, you know,
how could you be,
a, a human being who could
just, like, sit
and articulate this,
and own this, and say
that you were owning people,
um, say it out loud
in, in a public document,
and not feel guilty about this?
I think I feel quite a
bit of anger for Charles.
But then, you know, it, it,
the anger can't
be limited to him.
GATES: Mmm-hmm.
HILL: It's a
system that allowed it.
GATES: The system that held
Anita's ancestors in bondage
would soon come to an end.
In May of 1865, the
Union army entered Texas.
By that time, Anita's
great-great-grandparents,
Grandison and Penny Lewis, had
had several children together.
It is hard to imagine the
joy they must have felt to see
freedom finally come.
Unfortunately, they were
about to face a fresh ordeal,
as we saw in a complaint
detailing the abuses that
newly-freed African Americans
in Bowie County suffered
at the hands of a white
planter named Warren Hooks.
HILL: "In July 1865 Warren
Hooks Esquire took my brother
Alex Hooks and took his
pants down and laid him on the
ground and did severely beat
him in my presence with a wide
strap made of leather.
And in the same year and month
he did take one Grandison Lewis,
colored, who was in his employ,
and beat him with a
large ten foot pole and
drew blood from his head.
Because he said Grandison
had not hauled wheat
enough that morning.
In the fall of 1867,
said Warren Hooks,
did hit a colored woman named
Penny Lewis with a grub and
his fist and whipped her
son Spencer, 13 years of age."
GATES: A grub is a hoe.
HILL: Yeah. Wow.
That was terrible.
GATES: Yeah.
And this is three
years after the,
uh, end of slavery, but
they're still being treated
as if they're slaves.
HILL: Slaves.
Like Hooks owned them.
GATES: How do you think your
ancestors responded to this?
They were basically
being terrorized.
HILL: They
probably felt vulnerable,
but maybe, to survive,
they just became numb to it.
GATES: Mmm-hmm.
HILL: I, I, I think
that would've been a,
a natural reaction to
something that you live with
every day, something so brutal
that you live with every day,
but you know you
can't do anything about,
and no one else is
going to do anything.
GATES: Anita's ancestors may
well have been frightened,
but they didn't
give in to those fears.
Quite the contrary:
in the summer of 1867,
despite the
threats all around him,
her great-great-grandfather
Grandison left the relative
safety of his home.
And registered to vote.
HILL: "Bowie County.
Date of registry: July 17.
Names of voters:
Grandison Lewis."
Wow.
So, even in, in, in his despair,
he, he still wanted
to claim his right.
And that's, like,
yeah, that really is,
I mean, that's just a personal
level of personal courage,
to still believe,
GATES: Mm-mm.
HILL: To still believe
that there was
something that you could do,
that something that you could
do would matter.
GATES: Right.
HILL: Wow.
GATES: How does it
feel to see that?
HILL: You know, it the other
part of it is so awful,
and so depressing, and so,
it, it makes me so angry.
But you see this, and
you, you, you realize that
they still
had, had an investment,
that, in, in, in
their own future,
in their own well-being, that
they, they didn't just give up.
GATES: Mm-mm.
HILL: Um, and they still had
a belief in the system.
You know, I don't, I don't
know how they kept that.
I don't know how, um,
given that you were under
physical threat, how do
you look beyond that,
and believe in a system
that really wasn't intended
to protect you?
GATES: No.
But it's obvious that he
believed that if you could vote,
and you voted, you
could change the system.
HILL: Right.
GATES: Incredible.
HILL: Yeah.
How can you still believe?
GATES: As it turns out,
Anita's ancestor was not only
idealistic, he was
supremely pragmatic,
as evidenced by a series of
tax records from Bowie County,
which, taken together,
tell an astonishing story.
HILL: "1889
assessment of property.
Owner: Grandison Lewis.
Original grantee:
Charles Lewis.
Acres: 60.
Value: 120 dollars."
Wow.
GATES: In 1874, nine
years after slavery ended,
your great-great-grandfather
became the owner of
175 acres of land.
15 years later, he
purchased an additional
60 acres of land that was
originally granted to
Charles Lewis, the man
who had once owned him.
HILL: Wow.
GATES: We believe your
ancestor actually purchased
part of the land on which he
had been previously enslaved.
HILL: Ha.
That's some justice.
GATES: What's it
like to see that?
HILL: I just, I, I'm just in
awe of, of the ability and, and
the willingness to, just
to stick in there and keep
pushing for your rights, uh,
and getting what's due to you,
and maybe it wasn't
all that was due,
but you know, you start to
chip away with what has been
taken from you, and you demand
to take some of it back.
GATES: The paper trail had
run out for each of my guests.
PACKNETT: Oh my gosh.
GATES: It was time to
unfurl their family trees.
PACKNETT: This is incredible.
GATES: Now filled with names
they'd never heard before.
PACKNETT: This is my family.
Oh my gosh.
HILL: I know to
some people, you know,
you go back 1,000 years,
to me this is like
going back 1,000 years.
GATES: It is for an
African American.
HILL: Yeah, this is. Great.
Oh, it's wonderful.
Thank you.
GATES: Seeing their ancestors
laid out before them,
stretching back centuries,
allowed each to reflect on the
women and men who had done so
much to lay the groundwork
for their success.
What do you think you've
inherited from these people?
HILL: Well, I like to
hope and believe that I've
inherited tenacity,
and, and the,
really the ability
to, to claim citizenship.
And, and what's it's taught me
is that that's a legacy that
I have to continue,
whether it's using your voice,
or whether it's can be
pushing your, your rights.
Um, it's something that I
have now a birthright to,
and that I need to continue.
PACKNETT: Seeing this makes me
feel completely unbreakable.
GATES: What do you mean?
PACKNETT: They survived.
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: They
stayed together.
They birthed generations
that were not supposed
to see the sun.
And it probably doesn't match
the feeling that I thought
I was going to have...
GATES: Mm-hmm.
PACKNETT: But I feel
completely unbreakable.
GATES: That's the end
of our journey with
Brittany Packnett Cunningham
and Anita Hill.
Join me next time
when we unlock the
secrets of the past
for new guests on another
episode of "Finding Your Roots".